# Update 22 October 2023
Matt Costa is an R user, so to convert the mat file to R, I sent him this code to use in R:
```
install.packages("R.matlab")
library(R.matlab)
data <- readMat("NEplants_neg_aligned.2023.10.11.mat")
```

Apparently the sInfo matrix does not get exported so there is no way to link sample with filename. Hence I just uploaded an Excel file (```NEplants_exportMetadata_from_sInfo_forMatt.2023.10.22.xlsx```) with the metadata for Matt. In the Excel file, column B is 'FileName' and column 5 is the information Matt sent to WHOI. In the R file that is generated by the R.matlab package, the variable data$filename will match the FileNames in the Excel file.

# What are the variables in the *mat file?
Krista Longnecker, 12 October 2023

The important variables (you can ignore the others generated by R.matlab)

_NameOfFile_	This is the name of the *mat file you have

_EICdata_	The extracted ion chromatograms for the entire sample set. The number of rows matches the number of features in the dataset, where a feature is a unique combination of m/z and retention time. The number of columns matches the number of samples in the dataset.

_Peaks_	This has the same number of rows as EIC data and is the list of m/z values associated with each feature.

_RT_	This has the same number of rows as EIC data and is the list of retention times (in seconds) values associated with each feature.

We often call the combination of Peaks and RT a 'feature', or an 'mzRT feature'. These are analogous to OTUs in biology. The EICdata contains the peak area for each mzRT feature, which is a measure of relative abundance.
